<center>
# Relational data
</center>

!!! note "Lesson objectives"

    * Understand the concepts in relational data
    * Understand the different `join` functions
    * Use `join` functions to combine tables

## A brief introduction to relational data

Data analysis rarely involves only one data source. In many cases, insightful conclusions (and hypotheses) must be gleaned and built by combining data from multiple sources. Collectively, this type of data is termed relational data, where the relationships between data points are of primary importance. Relational data is widespread in biology, and you would have undoubtedly encountered and generated it during your research. The table below outlines some cases where relational data can arise from:

| Case                                                                           | Example scenario                                                                                                                               |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Subjecting the same data to different types of analyses                        | Based on an amino acid sequence, predict signal peptide sequences, active site motifs, and secondary structures using different software.      |
| Collecting and analysing different data from the same sample.                  | Correlate chemical measurements of different metabolites with sequence variants within a population.                                           |
| Comparing your data and those available in the literature or public databases. | Identify homology between your set of sequences and those in NCBI’s RefSeq and then query the sequence’s role in metabolism via gene ontology. |

Almost all modern databases rely on concepts derived from relational data. For example, searching for something in NCBI will return matches across various databases (e.g., Gene, Protein, Nucleotide, etc.). When you access one of the records, you can see on the right panel that there are links to other NCBI databases for that record (e.g., Taxonomy, Conserved Domains, BioProjects, etc.). Moreover, the use of controlled vocabulary across biological databases (e.g., KEGG orthology (KO), enzyme commission (EC) numbers, transporter classification (TC) numbers, GO IDs, etc.) has made it easier to cross-reference information stored in other databases.

### The *key* to relational data

An essential characteristic of relational data is that data across multiple tables are connected via keys. You can think of them as IDs. When analysing tabular biological data, there is often a sequence ID (almost always based on the FASTA header) and other accompanying information (e.g., prediction scores, alignment scores, and other statistics). Let’s say we annotated this sequence using BLAST and set it to produce a tabular output (`-outfmt 6`). BLAST would use the sequence header as the query ID/accession, and there would be another subject ID/accession column for hits in the database. This subject ID can then be used as a key to access other information kept in another table, perhaps taxonomic lineage, functional information, or even other accessions/IDs/keys to other records maintained in other databases. 

<!-- Figure: An image of a BLAST table, linked with other tabular information -->

## Managing relational tabular data in R using `dplyr`

To help us combine tabular data in R, we will use a set of `*_join()` functions from the `dplyr` package. If you are familiar with the relational database management system SQL, you should feel comfortable with these functions’ relational operations. These functions will return a `NA` for non-matching keys or missing observations while preserving valid joins for other observations. The functions are split into two categories depending on the output, namely **mutating joins** and **filtering joins**. The sub-sections below aim to summarise how the joins work. Still, I find a Cartesian representation of the joins in this [book section](https://r4ds.hadley.nz/joins.html#how-do-joins-work) very helpful in genuinely grasping the procedure.

!!! note "Joining keys"

    By default, all join functions will look for columns with the same name across both tables and attempt a join by specifying those columns as keys. In addition, all join functions have a `by` argument that allows you to determine which columns should be considered as keys across both tables. 

    ```r
    left_join(x, y, by = c("patient_id", "treatment_id"))
    ```

    The code above `mutate()` new columns into table `x` based on matching keys found in the `patient_id` and `treatment_id` columns in both tables `x` and `y`.

    This is also handy when tables have columns with matching values (keys) but are named differently.

    ```r
    left_join(x, y, by = c("patient_id" = "Hospital_ID"))
    ```

    Above, the tables `x` and `y` are joined based on key values named `patient_id` in table `x` and `Hospital_ID` in table `y`.

### Mutating joins

These combine columns from two tables by adding new columns (i.e., `mutate()`) to table `x` from table `y`. These new columns are added **to the right of table `x`**. There are four mutating joins split into two sub-categories, namely inner and outer joins.

| Join type  | Function           | Description                                                            |
| ---------- | ------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Inner join | `inner_join(x, y)` | Add columns for observations with matching keys in both `x` and `y`.   |
| Outer join | `left_join(x, y)`  | Add columns for observations with matching keys in `x` but not in `y`. |
| Outer join | `right_join(x, y)` | Same as `left_join()`, but preserves all observations in `y` instead of `x`.                                           |
| Outer join | `full_join(x, y)`  | Add columns for all observations in both `x` and `y`.                  |

Of the four mutating joins, `left_join()` is often the default choice.

??? question "Why use `inner_join()` and `full_join()`? An anecdotal account."

    Occasionally, there are compelling reasons to dabble in `inner_join()` and `full_join()`. Many bioinformatics analyses are run in parallel (e.g., annotations against multiple databases or sequence curation using multiple software) to obtain as much information as possible. Essentially, these are identical sequences analysed in different ways.

    Let’s assume that we are interested in well-characterised genes and pathways. Multiple analyses should have produced concordant results for a subset of sequences, thereby reducing the chance of false positives. In this scenario, using `inner_join()` will combine those results based on your sequence ID, generating a table consisting only of results shared consistently across both analyses.

    In a related scenario, we might be interested in looking at all the outputs of multiple analyses at a glance. Perhaps we are looking for novel or less well-characterised genes, suspect some analyses may propagate database biases, or want to perform further analyses to eliminate redundancies based on home-grown criteria. Here, we are likely more interested in preventing false negatives. In this case, combine tables using a `full_join()` to preserve all data points for further curation.


### Filtering joins

These joins filter table `x` based on matches with table `y`. There are only two members of this category:

| Function          | Description                                                        |
| ----------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `semi_join(x, y)` | Filter table `x` to **retain** rows based on matching keys in `y`. |
| `anti_join(x, y)` | Filter table `x` to **remove** rows based on matching keys in `y`. |

If you are joining tables based on one key, these functions are equivalent to the following:

```r
# semi_join(x, y)
filter(x, key %in% y$key)

# anti_join(x, y)
filter(x, !(key %in% y$key))
```

??? question "If `filter()` works, why use with filtering joins?"

    Filtering joins come in handy when you have to filter by multiple keys. You can probably use `filter()` for a few keys (1 – 3 columns, your mileage may vary). However, it gets cumbersome quickly if you have too many or if they might be named differently. Perhaps you may have an expert collaborator who has done some curation of your results for you and produced a table. Using a `semi_join()` will likely save you time (and lines of code) to create a table you can analyse downstream. Think of the poor reader who has to figure out which column things are being filtered by!

## Experimenting with `*_join()`

At the beginning of the workshop, we have imported 3 data frames. This is how each of them are related to each other:

<!-- image of X, Y, Z matrices -->

`View()` each of them to get a feel for how these tables are related.






<!--
Send this to String manipulation:
    This is because sequence variants taxonomically assigned to plastids (mitochondria and chloroplast) were removed from `asv` during processing in QIIME2 (link to supplementary).
-->


